*************************
Python Interface to NeXus
*************************
The Python interface to NeXus is provided by the `nexusformat
<https://github.com/nexpy/nexusformat>`__ package, which is distributed
separately from NeXpy.


The Python API can be used within a standard Python or IPython shell::

 $ python
 Python 3.10.6 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Aug 22 2022, 20:41:54) [Clang 13.0.1 ] on darwin
 Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
 >>> from nexusformat.nexus import *

.. note:: Although wildcard imports are usually discouraged in Python,
          all the imported functions and variables start with 'nx' or
          'NX', so the risk of namespace conflicts should be small.

.. seealso:: A `Jupyter notebook
             <https://github.com/nexpy/nexusformat/blob/master/src/nexusformat/notebooks/nexusformat.ipynb>`__
             provides a tutorial for the Python API. It can be run in
             `Google Colaboratory
             <https://colab.research.google.com/github/nexpy/nexusformat/blob/master/src/nexusformat/notebooks/nexusformat.ipynb>`__.


Loading NeXus Data
==================
The entire tree structure of a NeXus file can be loaded by a single command::

 >>> a=nxload('sns/data/ARCS_7326_tof.nxs')

The assigned variable now contains the entire tree structure of the
file, which can be displayed by printing the 'tree' property::

 >>> print(a.tree)
 root:NXroot
  @HDF5_Version = '1.8.2'
  @NeXus_version = '4.2.1'
  @file_name = 'ARCS_7326_tof.nxs'
  @file_time = '2010-05-05T01:59:25-05:00'
  entry:NXentry
    data:NXdata
      @axes = ['rotation_angle' 'tilt_angle' 'sample_angle' 'time_of_flight']
      @signal = 'data'
      data = float32(631x461x4x825)
      rotation_angle = float32(632)
        @units = 'degree'
      sample_angle = float32(5)
        @units = 'degree'
      tilt_angle = float32(462)
        @units = 'degree'
      time_of_flight = float32(826)
        @units = 'microsecond'
    run_number = '7326'
    sample:NXsample
      pulse_time = 2854.947473649946
        @units = 'microsecond'

Individual data items are immediately accessible from the command-line::

 >>> print(a.entry.run_number)
 7326

Only the tree structure and the values of smaller data sets are read
from the file to avoid using up memory unnecessarily. In the above
example, only the types and dimensions of the larger data sets are
displayed in the tree. Data is loaded only when it is needed, for
plotting or calculations, either as a complete array, if memory allows,
or as a series of slabs (see below).

.. note:: The maximum size of data that will be read from a file into
          memory can be configured using ``nxsetconfig``. Details of
          other configuration variables are described later.

There is a second optional argument to the load module that defines the
access mode for the existing data. For example, the following opens the
file in read/write mode::

 >>> a=nxload('chopper.nxs', mode='rw')

The default mode is 'r', *i.e.*, readonly access. The `nxload` function
will accept any mode values allowed when opening h5py files, such as
'r+', 'w', 'w-', and 'a' (see the `h5py documentation
<http://docs.h5py.org/en/stable/high/file.html>`__ for more details),
but once open, the mode values are stored as 'r' or 'rw'.

.. warning:: If the file is opened in read/write mode, any changes are
             made automatically to the file itself. In particular, any
             deletions of file objects will be irreversible. If
             necessary, a backup of the file can be made using the
             ``backup`` function.

.. seealso:: :mod:`nexusformat.nexus.tree.NXroot.backup`

Creating NeXus Data
===================
It is just as easy to create new NeXus data sets from scratch using
NumPy arrays. The following example shows the creation of a simple
function, which is then saved to a file::

 >>> import numpy as np
 >>> x=y=np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,101)
 >>> X,Y=np.meshgrid(x,y)
 >>> z=np.sin(X)*np.sin(Y)
 >>> a=NXdata(z,[y,x])
 >>> a.save('function.nxs')

This file can then be loaded again::

 >>> b=nxload('function.nxs')
 >>> print(b.tree)
 root:NXroot
   @HDF5_Version = '1.12.2'
  @file_name = '/home/username/function.nxs'
  @file_time = '2023-02-10T15:50:17.419158'
  @h5py_version = '3.7.0'
  @nexusformat_version = '1.0.0'
  entry:NXentry
    data:NXdata
      @axes = ['axis1', 'axis2']
      @signal = 'signal'
      axis1 = float64(101)
      axis2 = float64(101)
      signal = float64(101x101)

.. note:: The save() method automatically wraps any valid NeXus data in
          an NXentry group, in order to produce a standard-compliant
          file. See `Saving NeXus Data`_ for more details.

NeXus Objects
=============
NeXus data are stored in a hierarchical tree structure, much like a
computer file system. NeXus data structures consist of groups, with base
class NXgroup, which can contain fields, with base class NXfield, and/or
other groups.

NeXus Fields
------------
NeXus data values are stored in NeXus objects of class 'NXfield'. The
NXfield class wraps standard NumPy arrays, scalars, and Python strings
so that additional metadata (or attributes) and methods can be
associated with them.

There are three ways to create an NXfield.

1. Direct assignment::

    >>> x = NXfield(np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,101), units='degree')

  The data value is given by the first positional argument, and may be a
  Python scalar or string, or a NumPy array. In this method, keyword
  arguments can be used to define NXfield `attributes`_.

2. Dictionary assignment to the NeXus group::

    >>> a['entry/sample/temperature']=40.0

3. Attribute assignment as the child of a NeXus group::

    >>> a.entry.sample.temperature=40.0

  The assigned values are automatically converted to an NXfield::

    >>> a.entry.sample.temperature
    NXfield(40.0)

  Dictionary and attribute assignments are equivalent, but dictionary
  assignments should always be used if there is a danger of a name clash
  with, for example, group or field methods. They are also recommended
  when writing scripts. Attribute assignments are allowed because they
  are much faster to type in interactive sessions.

.. note:: When using the NeXpy GUI shell (see :doc:`pythongui`), it is
          possible to use tab completion to check for possible name
          clashes with NXfield methods. Autocompletion can be added as
          an extension to IPython sessions as well::

            >>> from nexusformat.nexus.completer import load_ipython_extension
            >>> load_ipython_extension(get_ipython())

The data in an NXfield can be of type integer, float, or character. The
type is normally inherited automatically from the data type of the
Python object, although it is possible to define alternative (but
compatible) datatypes. For example, a float64 array can be converted to
float32 on assignment::

  >>> x=np.linspace(0, 2*np.pi,101)
  >>> x.dtype
  dtype('float64')
  >>> a=NXfield(x, dtype='float32')
  >>> a.dtype
  dtype('float32')
  >>> b=NXfield('Some Text')
  >>> b.dtype, b.shape
  (dtype('O'), ())

.. note:: Numeric dtypes can be defined either as a string, *e.g.*,
          'int16', 'float32', or using the NumPy dtypes, *e.g.*,
          np.int16, np.float32.

.. warning:: By default, Python strings are stored as variable-length
             strings in the HDF5 file. These use a special object dtype
             defined by h5py (see the `h5py documentation
             <http://docs.h5py.org/en/latest/special.html#variable-length-strings>`__). If you wish to store
             fixed length strings, specify a dtype of kind 'S', *e.g.*,
             'S10' when creating the NXfield.

.. warning:: If you wish to store an array of strings containing Unicode
             characters as fixed-length strings, convert them to byte
             strings first using UTF-8 encoding, *e.g.*::

               >>> text_array = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'é']
               >>> a=NXfield([t.encode('utf8') for t in text_array], dtype='S')
               >>> a
               NXfield(['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'é'])
               >>> a.dtype
               dtype('S2')

The shape and dimension sizes of an integer or float array are inherited
from the assigned NumPy array. It is possible to initialize an NXfield
array without specifying the data values in advance, *e.g.*, if the data
is too large to be stored in memory and has to be written as slabs::

  >>> a=NXfield(dtype=np.float32, shape=[2048,2048,2048])
  >>> a
  NXfield(shape=(2048, 2048, 2048), dtype=float32)

More details of handling large arrays are given below.

.. _attributes:

NeXus attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The NeXus standard allows additional attributes to be attached to
NXfields to contain metadata ::

 >>> a['entry/sample/temperature'].units='K'

These have a class of NXattr. They can be defined using the 'attrs'
dictionary if necessary to avoid name clashes::

 >>> a['entry/sample/temperature'].attrs['units']='K'

Other common attributes include the 'signal' and 'axes' attributes used
to define the plottable signal and independent axes, respectively, in a
NXdata group.

When a NeXus tree is printed, the attributes are prefixed by '@'::

 >>> print(a.entry.sample.tree)
 sample:NXsample
   temperature = 40.0
     @units = 'K'

Masked Arrays
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
NumPy has the ability to store arrays with masks to remove missing or
invalid data from computations of, *e.g.*, averages or maxima. Since
Matplotlib is able to handle masked arrays and removes masked data from
plots, this is a convenient way of preventing bad data from
contaminating statistical analyses, while preserving all the data
values, good and bad, *i.e.*, masks can be turned on and off.

NeXpy uses the same syntax as NumPy for masking and unmasking data.

 >>> z = NXfield([1,2,3,4,5,6], name='z')
 >>> z[3:5] = np.ma.masked
 >>> z
 NXfield(masked_array(data=[1, 2, 3, --, --, 6],
              mask=[False, False, False,  True,  True, False],
        fill_value=999999))
 >>> z.mask
 array([False, False, False,  True,  True, False])
 >>> z.mask[3] = np.ma.nomask
 >>> z
 NXfield(masked_array(data=[1, 2, 3, 4, --, 6],
              mask=[False, False, False, False,  True, False],
        fill_value=999999))

.. warning:: If you perform any operations on a masked array, those
             operations are not performed on the masked values. It is
             not advisable to remove a mask if you have modified the
             unmasked values.

If the NXfield does not have a parent group, the mask is stored within
the field as in NumPy arrays. However, if the NXfield has a parent
group, the mask is stored in a separate NXfield that is generated
automatically by the mask assignment or whenever the masked NXfield is
assigned to a group. The mask is identified by the 'mask' attribute of
the masked NXfield.

 >>> print(NXlog(z).tree)
 log:NXlog
 z = [1 2 3 4 -- 6]
  @mask = 'z_mask'
 z_mask = [False False False False  True False]

The mask can then be saved to the NeXus file if required.

.. warning:: In principle, the NXfield containing the mask can be
             modified manually, but it is recommended that
             modifications to the mask use the methods described above.

Masks can also be set using the Projection panel in the
:doc:`pythongui`.

Large Arrays
^^^^^^^^^^^^
If the size of an array is too large to be loaded into memory (see
`Loading NeXus Data`_), the NXfield can be created without any initial
values, and then filled incrementally as slabs::

 >>> entry['data/z'] = NXfield(shape=(1000,1000,1000), dtype=np.float32)
 >>> for i in range(1000):
         entry.data.z[i,:,:] = np.ones(shape=(1000,1000), dtype=np.float32)
             ...

If ``entry`` in the above example is already stored in a NeXus file
(with write access), then ``entry['data/z']`` is automatically updated
in the file. If it is not stored in a file, the field is stored in an
HDF5 core memory file that will be copied to the NeXus file when it is
saved.

When initializing the NXfield, it is possible to specify a number of
HDF5 attributes that specify how the data are stored.

* Compression::

    >>> z = NXfield(shape=(1000,1000,1000), dtype=np.float32, compression='lzf')

  This specifies the compression filter used. For large arrays, the data
  are compressed with the ``gzip`` filter by default.

* Chunk size::

    >>> z = NXfield(shape=(1000,1000,1000), dtype=np.float32, chunks=(1,100,100))

  If chunk sizes are not specified, *e.g.*, with ``chunks=True``, HDF5
  will choose default sizes.

* Maximum array shape::

    >>> z = NXfield(shape=(10,1000,1000), dtype=np.float32, maxshape=(1000,1000,1000))

  The initial shape is defined by the ``shape`` attribute, but it will
  be automatically expanded up to a limit of ``maxshape`` if necessary
  using the NXfield ``resize`` function.

    >>> z.resize((100,1000,1000))
    >>> z.shape
    (100, 1000, 1000)

.. seealso:: :mod:`nexusformat.nexus.tree.NXfield.resize`

* Fill value::

    >>> z = NXfield(shape=(1000,1000,1000), dtype=np.float32, fillvalue=np.nan)

  Slabs that are not initialized will contain the specified fill value.
  This is normally set to zero by default.

All these values can be adjusted at the command line until the first
slab has been written, whether to a file or in core memory, using the
``compression``, ``chunks``, ``maxshape`` or ``fillvalue`` properties,
*e.g.*

 >>> z = NXfield(shape=(1000,1000,1000), dtype=np.float32)
 >>> z.compression = 'lzf'

NeXus Groups
------------
NeXus groups are defined as subclasses of the NXgroup class, with the
class name defining the type of information they contain, *e.g.*, the
NXsample class contains metadata that define the measured sample, such
as its temperature or lattice parameters. The initialization parameters
can be used to populate the group with other predefined NeXus objects,
either groups or fields::

 >>> temperature = NXfield(40.0, units='K')
 >>> sample = NXsample(temperature=temperature)
 >>> print(sample.tree)
 sample:NXsample
   temperature = 40.0
     @units = 'K'

In this example, it was necessary to use the keyword form to add the
NXfield 'temperature' since its name is otherwise undefined within the
NXsample group. However, the name is set automatically if the NXfield is
assigned to the group::

 >>> sample = NXsample()
 >>> sample['temperature']=NXfield(40.0, units='K')
 >>> print(sample.tree)
 sample:NXsample
   temperature = 40.0
     @units = 'K'

The NeXus objects in a group (NXfields or NXgroups) can be accessed as
dictionary items::

 >>> sample['temperature'] = 40.0
 >>> sample.keys()
 dict_keys(['temperature'])

.. note:: It is also possible to reference objects by their complete
          paths with respect to the root object, *e.g.*,
          root['/entry/sample/temperature'].

If a group is not created as another group attribute, its internal name
defaults to the class name without the 'NX' prefix. This can be useful
in automatically creating nested groups::

 >>> a=NXentry(NXsample(temperature=40.0),NXinstrument(NXdetector(distance=10.8)))
 >>> print(a.tree)
 entry:NXentry
   instrument:NXinstrument
     detector:NXdetector
       distance = 10.8
   sample:NXsample
     temperature = 40.0

.. seealso:: Existing NeXus objects can also be inserted directly into
             groups. See :mod:`nexusformat.nexus.tree.NXgroup.insert`

NXdata Groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
NXdata groups contain data ready to be plotted. That means that the
group should consist of an NXfield containing the signal and one or more
NXfields containing the axes. NeXus defines a method of associating axes
with the appropriate dimension, but NeXpy provides a simple constructor
that implements this method automatically. This was already demonstrated
in the example above, reproduced here::

 >>> import numpy as np
 >>> x=y=np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,101)
 >>> X,Y=np.meshgrid(x,y)
 >>> z=np.sin(X)*np.sin(Y)
 >>> a=NXdata(z,[y,x])

The first positional argument is an NXfield or NumPy array containing
the data, while the second is a list containing the axes, again as
NXfields or NumPy arrays. In this example, the names of the arrays have
not been defined within an NXfield so default names were assigned::

 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = ['axis1' 'axis2']
   @signal = signal
   axis1 = float64(101)
   axis2 = float64(101)
   signal = float64(101x101)

.. note:: The plottable signal and axes are identified by the 'signal'
          and 'axes' attributes of the NXdata group. The 'axes'
          attribute defines the axes as a list of NXfield names. The
          NXdata constructor sets these attributes automatically.

.. warning:: NumPy stores arrays by default in C, or row-major, order,
             *i.e.*, in the array 'signal(axis1,axis2)', axis2 is the
             fastest to vary. In most image formats, *e.g.*, TIFF
             files, the x-axis is assumed to be the fastest varying
             axis, so we are adopting the same convention and plotting
             as ``signal[y,x]``. The :doc:`pythongui` allows the x and
             y axes to be swapped.

Names can be assigned explicitly when creating the NXfield through the
'name' attribute::

 >>> phi=NXfield(np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,101), name='polar_angle')
 >>> data=NXfield(np.sin(phi), name='intensity')
 >>> a=NXdata(data,(phi,))
 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'polar_angle'
   @signal = 'intensity'
   intensity = float64(101)
   polar_angle = float64(101)

.. note:: In the above example, the x-axis, ``phi``, was defined as a
          tuple in the second positional argument of the NXdata call.
          It could also have been defined as a list. However, in the
          case of one-dimensional signals, it would also have been
          acceptable just to call ``NXdata(data, phi)``, *i.e.*,
          without embedding the axis in a tuple or list.

It is also possible to define the plottable signal and axes using the
``nxsignal`` and ``nxaxes`` properties, respectively::

 >>> phi=np.linspace(0,2*np.pi, 101)
 >>> a=NXdata()
 >>> a.nxsignal=NXfield(np.sin(phi), name='intensity')
 >>> a.nxaxes=NXfield(phi, name='polar_angle')
 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'polar_angle'
   @signal = 'intensity'
   intensity = float64(101)
   polar_angle = float64(101)

Similarly, signal errors can be added using the ``nxerrors`` property::

 >>> a.nxerrors = np.sqrt(np.abs(np.sin(phi)))
 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'polar_angle'
   @signal = 'intensity'
   intensity = float64(101)
   intensity_errors = float64(101)
   polar_angle = float64(101)

.. note:: In a NXdata group, errors for each field are defined by
          another field with '_errors' appended to the name.

NeXus Links
-----------
NeXus allows groups and fields to be assigned to multiple locations
through the use of links. These objects have the class NXlink and
contain the attribute ``target``, which identifies the parent object. It
is also possible to link to fields in another NeXus file (see `External
Links`_ below).

For example, the polar angle and time-of-flight arrays may logically be
stored with the detector information in a NXdetector group that is one
of the NXinstrument subgroups::

 >>> print(entry['instrument'].tree)
 instrument:NXinstrument
   detector:NXdetector
    distance = float32(128)
      @units = 'metre'
    polar_angle = float32(128)
      @units = 'radian'
    time_of_flight = float32(8252)
      @target = '/entry/instrument/detector/time_of_flight'
      @units = 'microsecond'

However, they may also be needed as plotting axes in a NXdata group::

 >>> print(entry['data'].tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = ['polar_angle' 'time_of_flight']
   @signal = data
   data = uint32(128x8251)
   polar_angle = float32(128)
     @target = '/entry/instrument/detector/polar_angle'
     @units = 'radian'
   time_of_flight = float32(8252)
     @target = '/entry/instrument/detector/time_of_flight'
     @units = 'microsecond'

Links allow the same data to be used in different contexts without using
more memory or disk space.

.. note:: In earlier verions, links were required to have the same name
          as their parents, but this restriction has now been lifted.

In the Python API, the user who is only interested in accessing the data
does not need to worry if the object is parent or child. The data values
and NeXus attributes of the parent to the NXlink object can be accessed
directly through the child object. The parent object can be referenced
directly, if required, using the ``nxlink`` attribute::

 >>> entry['data/time_of_flight']
 NXlink('/entry/instrument/detector/time_of_flight')
 >>> entry['data/time_of_flight'].nxdata
 array([   500.,    502.,    504., ...,  16998.,  17000.,  17002.], dtype=float32)
 >>> entry['data/time_of_flight'].units
 'microsecond'
 >>> entry['data/time_of_flight'].nxlink
 NXfield(dtype=float32,shape=(8252,))

.. note:: The absolute path of the data with respect to the root object
          of the NeXus tree is given by the nxpath property::

           >>> entry['data/time_of_flight'].nxpath
           '/entry/data/time_of_flight'
           >>> entry['data/time_of_flight'].nxlink.nxpath
           '/entry/instrument/bank1/time_of_flight'

Creating a Link
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Links can be created using the target object as the argument assigned
to another group::

 >>> print(root.tree)
 root:NXroot
   entry:NXentry
     data:NXdata
     instrument:NXinstrument
       detector:NXdetector
         polar_angle = float64(192)
           @units = 'radian'
 >>> root['entry/data/polar_angle']=NXlink(root['entry/instrument/detector/polar_angle'])

It is also possible to create links using the makelink method, which
takes the parent object and, optionally, a new name as arguments::

 >>> root['entry/data'].makelink(root['entry/instrument/detector/polar_angle'])
 >>> print(root.tree)
 root:NXroot
   entry:NXentry
     data:NXdata
       polar_angle = float64(192)
         @target = '/entry/instrument/detector/polar_angle'
         @units = 'radian'
     instrument:NXinstrument
       detector:NXdetector
         polar_angle = float64(192)
           @target = '/entry/instrument/detector/polar_angle'
           @units = 'radian'

.. note:: After creating the link, both the parent and target objects
          have an additional attribute, ``target``, showing the
          absolute path of the parent.

.. seealso:: :mod:`nexusformat.nexus.tree.NXgroup.makelink`

External Links
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
It is also possible to link to a NeXus field that is stored in another
file. This is accomplished using a similar syntax to internal links.

 >>> root['entry/data/data'] = NXlink('/counts', file='external_counts.nxs')

In the case of external links, the first argument is the absolute path
of the linked object within the external file, while the second argument
is the absolute or relative file path of the external file.

By default, the target file path is converted to a relative path with
respect to the parent file. If it is required to store the absolute file
path, add the keyword argument, ``abspath=True``.

 >>> root['entry/data/data'] = NXlink('/counts',
                                      file='/home/user/external_counts.nxs',
                                      abspath=True)

.. warning:: If the files are moved without preserving their relative
             file paths, the parent file will still open but the link
             will be broken.

Plotting NeXus Data
===================
NXdata, NXmonitor, and NXlog groups all have a plot method, which
automatically determines what should be plotted::

 >>> data.plot()

.. image:: /images/simple-plot.png
   :align: center
   :width: 80%

Note that the plot method uses the NeXus attributes within the groups to
determine automatically which NXfield is the signal, what its rank and
dimensions are, and which NXfields define the plottable axes. The same
command will work for one-dimensional or two-dimensional data. If you
plot higher-dimensional data, the top two-dimensional slice is plotted.
Alternative two-dimensional slices can be specified using slice indices
on the NXdata group.

.. note:: If the ``interpretation`` attribute is set to 'rgb' or 'rgba'
          and the final dimension is of size 3 or 4, the NXdata group
          will be plotted as an image using the colors defined by the
          final dimension. By default, images are displayed with the
          origin in the top-left corner.

If the data is one-dimensional, it is possible to overplot more than one
data set using 'over=True'. By default, each plot has a new color, but
conventional Matplotlib keywords can be used to change markers and
colors::

 >>> data.plot(log=True)
 >>> data.plot('r-')
 >>> data.plot(over=True, log=True, color='r')

If the NXdata group contains RGB(A) image data, *i.e.*, the signal is a
three-dimensional array, in which the fastest varying dimension, which
should be of size 3 or 4, contains the RGB(A) values for each
two-dimensional pixel, then the image can be plotted using the
'image=True'.

 >>> data.plot(image=True)

By convention, the first pixel of an image is in the upper-left corner,
rather than the lower-left used in other two-dimensional plots.

.. note:: The plot method also works on NXroot and NXentry groups, if
          they are able to identify plottable data. If the ``default``
          attribute is set, the default NXentry and/or NXdata groups
          are used. Otherwise, the first valid NXdata group found in an
          iterative search is used.

Additional Plot Methods
-----------------------
As a convenience, additional plot methods can be used instead of adding
extra keywords.

 >>> data.oplot()
 >>> data.logplot()
 >>> data.implot()

These are equivalent to setting the 'over', 'log', and 'image' keywords
to True when invoking the plot method.

Manipulating NeXus Data
=======================
Arithmetic Operations
---------------------
NXfield
^^^^^^^
NXfields usually consist of arrays of numeric data with associated
metadata, the NeXus attributes (the exception is when they contain
character strings). This makes them similar to NumPy arrays, and this
module allows the use of NXfields in numerical operations as if they
were NumPy ndarrays::

 >>> x = NXfield((1.0,2.0,3.0,4.0))
 >>> print(x+1)
 [ 2.  3.  4.  5.]
 >>> print(2*x)
 [ 2.  4.  6.  8.]
 >>> print(x/2)
 [ 0.5  1.   1.5  2. ]
 >>> print(x**2)
 [  1.   4.   9.  16.]
 >>> x.reshape((2,2))
 NXfield([[ 1.  2.]
 [ 3.  4.]])
 >>> y = NXfield((0.5,1.5,2.5,3.5))
 >>> x+y
 NXfield(name=x,value=[ 1.5  3.5  5.5  7.5])
 >>> x*y
 NXfield(name=x,value=[  0.5   3.    7.5  14. ])
 >>> (x+y).shape
 (4,)
 >>> (x+y).dtype
 dtype('float64')

Such operations return valid NXfield objects containing the same
attributes as the first NXobject in the expression. The 'reshape' and
'transpose' methods also return NXfield objects.

NXfields can be compared to other NXfields (this is a comparison of
their NumPy arrays)::

 >>> y=NXfield(np.array((1.5,2.5,3.5)),name='y')
 >>> x == y
 True

NXfields are technically not a sub-class of the NumPy ``ndarray`` class,
but they are cast as NumPy arrays when required by NumPy operations,
returning either another NXfield or, in some cases, an array that can
easily be converted to an NXfield::

 >>> x = NXfield((1.0,2.0,3.0,4.0))
 >>> x.size
 4
 >>> x.sum()
 10.0
 >>> x.max()
 4.0
 >>> x.mean()
 2.5
 >>> x.var()
 1.25
 >>> x.reshape((2,2)).sum(1)
 array([ 3.,  7.])
 >>> np.sin(x)
 array([ 0.84147098,  0.90929743,  0.14112001, -0.7568025 ])
 >>> np.sqrt(x)
 array([ 1.        ,  1.41421356,  1.73205081,  2.        ])
 >>> print(NXdata(np.sin(x), (x)).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'signal'
   signal = [ 0.84147098  0.90929743  0.14112001 -0.7568025 ]
   x = [ 1.  2.  3.  4.]

.. note:: If a function will only accept a NumPy array, use the
          ``nxvalue`` attribute, which returns the stored NumPy array.

            >>> x.nxvalue
            array([1., 2., 3., 4.])

NXdata
^^^^^^
Similar operations can also be performed on whole NXdata groups. If two
NXdata groups are to be added, the rank and dimensions of the main
signal array must match (although the names could be different)::

 >>> y=NXfield(np.sin(x),name='y')
 >>> y
 NXfield(name=y,value=[ 0.99749499  0.59847214 -0.35078323])
 >>> a=NXdata(y,x)
 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 0.99749499  0.59847214 -0.35078323]
 >>> print((a+1).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 1.99749499  1.59847214  0.64921677]
 >>> print((2*a).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 1.99498997  1.19694429 -0.70156646]
 >>> print((a+a).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 1.99498997  1.19694429 -0.70156646]
 >>> print((a-a).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 0.  0.  0.]
 >>> print((a/2).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 0.49874749  0.29923607 -0.17539161]

If data errors are included in the NXdata group, then the errors are
propagated according to the operand::

 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 0.99749499  0.59847214  0.35078323]
   y_errors = [ 0.99874671  0.77360981  0.59226956]
 >>> print((a+a).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'y'
   x = [ 1.5  2.5  3.5]
   y = [ 1.99498997  1.19694429  0.70156646]
   y_errors = [ 1.41244114  1.09404949  0.83759564]

Some statistical operations can be performed on the NXdata group.

* ``NXdata.sum(axis=None)``:
    Returns the sum of the NXdata signal data. If the axis is not
    specifed, the total is returned. Otherwise, it is summed along the
    specified axis. The result is a new NXdata group containing a copy
    of all the metadata contained in the original NXdata group::

     >>> x=np.linspace(0, 3., 4)
     >>> y=np.linspace(0, 2., 3)
     >>> X,Y=np.meshgrid(x,y)
     >>> a=NXdata(X*Y,(y,x))
     >>> print(a.tree)
     data:NXdata
       @axes = ['axis1' 'axis2']
       @signal = 'signal'
       axis1 = [ 0.  1.  2.  3.]
       axis2 = [ 0.  1.  2.]
       signal = float64(3x4)
     >>> a.nxsignal
     NXfield([[ 0.  0.  0.  0.]
      [ 0.  1.  2.  3.]
      [ 0.  2.  4.  6.]])
     >>> a.sum()
     18.0
     >>> a.sum(0).nxsignal
     NXfield([ 0.  3.  6.  9.])
     >>> a.sum(1).nxsignal
     NXfield([  0.   6.  12.])

* ``NXdata.average(axis=None)``:
    Returns the average of the NXdata signal data. This is identical to
    the sum method, but the result is divided by the number of data
    elements in the summation::

     >>> a.average()
     1.5
     >>> a.average(0).nxsignal
     NXfield([ 0.,  1.,  2.,  3.])
     >>> a.average(1).nxsignal
     NXfield([ 0. ,  1.5,  3. ])

* ``NXdata.moment(order=1)``:
    Returns an NXfield containing the first moment of the NXdata group
    assuming the signal is one-dimensional::

     >>> x=np.linspace(0, 10., 11)
     >>> y=np.exp(-(x-3)**2)
     >>> a=NXdata(y,x)
     >>> a.moment()
     3.0000002539776141


Slicing
-------
NXfields
^^^^^^^^
A slice of an NXfield can be obtained using the usual Python indexing
syntax::

 >>> x=NXfield(np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,101))
 >>> print(x[0:51])
 [ 0.          0.06283185  0.12566371 ...,  3.01592895  3.0787608 3.14159265]

If either of the indices are floats, then the limits are set by the
values themselves (assuming the array is monotonic)::

 >>> print(x[0.5:1.5])
 [ 0.50265482  0.56548668  0.62831853 ...,  1.38230077  1.44513262 1.50796447]

NXdata Groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
It is also possible to slice whole NXdata groups. In this case, the
slicing works on the multidimensional NXfield, but the full NXdata group
is returned with both the signal data and the associated axes limited by
the slice parameters. If either of the limits along any one axis is a
float, the limits are set by the values of the axis::

 >>> a=NXdata(np.sin(x),x)
 >>> a[1.5:2.5].x
 NXfield(name=x,value=[ 1.57079633  1.72787596  1.88495559 ...,  2.19911486  2.35619449])

Unless the slice reduces one of the axes to a single item, the rank of
the data remains the same. To project data along one of the axes, and so
reduce the rank by one, the data can be summed along that axis using the
sum() method. This employs the NumPy array sum() method::

 >>> x=y=NXfield(np.linspace(0,2*np.pi,41))
 >>> X,Y=np.meshgrid(x,y)
 >>> a=NXdata(np.sin(X)*np.sin(Y), (y,x))
 >>> print(a.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = ['axis1' 'axis2']
   @signal = 'signal'
   axis1 = float64(41)
   axis2 = float64(41)
   signal = float64(41x41)
 >>> print(a.sum(0).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'axis2'
   @signal = 'signal'
   axis2 = float64(41)
   signal = float64(41)
     @long_name = 'Integral from 0.0 to 6.28318530718'

This can be extended to higher dimensions, using a tuple as the sum()
argument. The following code projects a NXdata group, whose signal is a
three-dimensional array, down to a one-dimensional NXdata group. The
average values of the summed axes are stored as fields, with attributes
showing the range of the summation.

 >>> signal=NXfield(np.arange(60).reshape((3,4,5)), name='v')
 >>> x=NXfield(np.arange(5.0), name='x')
 >>> y=NXfield(np.arange(4.0), name='y')
 >>> z=NXfield(np.arange(3.0), name='z')
 >>> d=NXdata(signal, (z, y, x))
 >>> print(d.tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = ['z', 'y', 'x']
   @signal = 'v'
   v = int64(3x4x5)
   x = float64(5)
   y = float64(4)
   z = [0. 1. 2.]
 >>> print(d.sum((0,1)).tree)
 data:NXdata
   @axes = 'x'
   @signal = 'v'
   @summed_bins = 12
   title = 'data/data'
   v = int64(5)
   x = float64(5)
   y = 1.5
     @maximum = 3.0
     @minimum = 0.0
     @summed_bins = 4
   z = 1.0
     @maximum = 2.0
     @minimum = 0.0
     @summed_bins = 3

The :doc:`pythongui` provides a menu-based approach to simplify the
plotting of 1D and 2D data projections of multidimensional data.

Saving NeXus Data
=================
Every NeXus object, whether it is a group or a field, has a save()
method as illustrated in `Creating NeXus Data`_.::

 >>> root.save(filename='example.nxs')

NXroot Groups
-------------
If the NeXus object is a NXroot group, the save() method saves the whole
NeXus tree. The filename can only be omitted if the tree is being saved
to a file that was loaded with read/write access. In this case, the
format argument is ignored. If the tree was loaded with readonly access,
any modifications must be saved to a new file specified by the filename
argument.

Other Objects
-------------
If the object is not a NXroot group, a new file will be created
containing the selected object and its children. A filename *must* be
specified. Saving non-NXroot data allows parts of a NeXus tree to be
saved for later use, *e.g.*, to store an NXsample group that will be
added to other files. The saved NeXus object is wrapped in an NXroot
group and an NXentry group (with name 'entry'), if necessary, in order
to produce a valid NeXus file.

Validating NeXus Data
=====================

.. note:: Validation is only possible in v2.0.0. See :doc:`includeme`
          for more details.

NeXus groups can be checked against the current definitions of the NeXus
standard to look for non-compliant entries. The results are colorized,
with errors printed in red, warnings printed in orange, and
informational messages in black. Keyword arguments allow the results to
be filtered, with only warnings and errors output by default.

NXgroup objects have the following methods.

* check():
    This checks the contents of the NeXus group and its children against
    the base class definition.

    >>> root['entry/sample'].check(errors=True)

* validate():
    This validates a NXentry group against the application definition
    specified by the ``definition`` field or against another file
    specified as a keyword argument. This checks that the fields and
    groups required by the application definition are included. This
    method can only be applied to NXentry, NXsubentry, and NXroot groups
    (in which the first entry is selected).

    >>> root['data'].validate(info=True)

* inspect():
    This displays the base class definition as formatted XML.

    >>> root['entry'].inspect(info=True)

.. note:: By default, the groups are compared against the NeXus
          definition files contained within the package. Alternative
          definitions my be defined, either by setting the path to the
          definitions directory using `nxgetconfig(definitions="/path/
          to/definitions")` or by defining the NX_DEFINITIONS
          environment variable. The path should contain subdirectories
          named 'base_classes', 'applications' and
          'contributed_definitions'.



NeXus File Operations
=====================
Changes to a NeXus tree that has been loaded from disk or saved to a
file are automatically updated in the HDF5 file, assuming that it is
opened with read/write permissions. This means that the tree is always
an accurate representation of the current state of the NeXus file,
unless it has been modified by an external process, in which case, the
file should be reloaded.

.. note:: In the :doc:`pythongui`, the lock icon color for an
          externally modified file changes to red.

When a file is loaded, using the ``nxload`` function, the ``nxfile``
attribute of the root group is an ``NXFile`` object, which is thin
wrapper over the underlying `h5py.File
<http://docs.h5py.org/en/stable/high/file.html>`__ object::

  >>> root = nxload('chopper.nxs', 'r')
  >>> root['entry']
  NXentry('entry')
  >>> root.nxfile['/entry']
  <HDF5 group "/entry" (10 members)>

The ``nxload`` function can also be used to create a new file with the
mode set to 'w'. Any keywords accepted by `h5py.File
<http://docs.h5py.org/en/stable/high/file.html>`__ can be used to
customize the new HDF5 file, *e.g.*, to turn on SWMR mode.

.. warning:: There is usually no need to call the ``nxfile`` attribute
             except to invoke the context manager (see next section).
             If it is referenced, the underlying ``h5py.File`` object
             is left open. It should be explicitly closed by calling
             ``root.nxfile.close()``. The current status of the file can be determined by calling ``root.nxfile.is_open()``.

Multiple operations
-------------------
When a change is made to a NeXus file, which is open with read/write
access, it is automatically opened, updated, and then closed to ensure
that any changes are flushed to the file and other processes can read
the file if necessary. When writing or modifying multiple items in the
file, it is possible to use a context manager to prevent multiple
open/close operations::

  >>> with root.nxfile:
  >>>     root['entry/sample'] = NXsample()
  >>>     root['entry/sample/temperature'] = NXfield(40.0, units='K')
  >>>     root['entry/sample/mass'] = NXfield(5.0, units='g')

The file will be opened at the start of the of the ``with`` clause and
closed automatically at the end.

.. note:: This context manager can be nested so it is safe to add a ``with``
          clause within a function that might, in some implementations, be
          embedded in another ``with`` clause. The file is only closed when the
          outermost context manager is exited.

In v0.7.7, the ability to use a context manager directly with ``NXroot``
objects, rather than its associated ``NXfile``, was added. This allows
the use of a similar syntax to the Python ``open`` function, in which a
``with`` clause ensuring that the file is opened and closed, before and
after the file access, respectively. To make this analogy clearer,
``nxopen`` was added as an alias to ``nxload``.

In the following code, a NeXus file is created, filled with NeXus
objects and then closed.

  >>> with nxopen('nexus_file.nxs', 'w') as root:
  >>>     root['entry'] = NXentry()
  >>>     root['entry/sample'] = NXsample()
  >>>     root['entry/sample/temperature'] = NXfield(40.0, units='K')

File Locking
------------
The context manager can also be used to lock the NeXus file to prevent
other processes from accessing the file. According to the `HDF5
documentation
<https://support.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/hdf5-quest.html#gconc>`__, concurrent
read access is supported if the HDF5 library has been built as
thread-safe. This appears to be the default with conda installations,
for example. However, concurrent read and write access is only allowed
when using SWMR mode. To prevent issues with multiple processes
accessing the same file, *nexusformat* contains a simple file-locking
mechanism, which is designed to work even when the processes are running
on separate nodes and when other file-locking mechanisms might prove
unreliable (*e.g.*, on NFS-mounted disks).

.. warning:: Unfortunately, the word 'lock' can cause confusion because
             it is commonly used to refer to two different operations.
             The other one is to switch a file from read/write to
             read-only mode, *e.g.*, ::

               >>> root.lock()

             This operation will prevent the current process from
             writing to the file, but it does *not* add a file lock to
             prevent I/O conflicts with other processes.

A new file is created with the same name as the NeXus file, with the
additional extension '.lock'. Other processes using the *nexusformat*
package will wait until the lock is cleared before performing any
further I/O operations. By default, this lock file is created in the
same directory as the NeXus file, but this will fail if the user does
not have sufficient permissions to create the file in that directory.
For this reason, it is possible to define another directory with relaxed
group and/or world permissions to store the lock files.

Configuring File Locks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
File-locking is configured using ``nxgetconfig`` and ``nxsetconfig``
(see next section). File locking is enabled by setting a non-zero value
for the ``lock`` parameter, which defines the length of time the process
will wait before triggering a ``NXLockException`` exception. Then, the
context manager described above will create and remove the  lock file at
the beginning and end of the ``with`` clause, respectively.

  >>> nxgetconfig('lock')
  0
  >>> nxsetconfig(lock=10)
  >>> with root.nxfile:
  >>>     root['entry/sample'] = NXsample()
  >>>     root['entry/sample/temperature'] = NXfield(40.0, units='K')

The lock file name is the name of the NeXus file with ``.lock``
appended. If a stale lock is encountered, it may be cleared by calling
``clear_lock``::

  >>> root.nxfile.is_locked()
  True
  >>> root.nxfile.clear_lock()
  >>> root.nxfile.is_locked()
  False

.. note:: This lock is advisory. It is only guaranteed to work if the
          external process is also using *nexusformat*.

Configuration Parameters
========================
The *nexusformat* package uses a number of parameters to configure its
default behavior. These are stored internally in a dictionary, which may
be read or modified using the ``nxgetconfig`` and ``nxsetconfig``
functions, respectively.

  >>> nxgetconfig()
  {'compression': 'gzip',
   'encoding': 'utf-8',
   'lock': 0,
   'lockexpiry': 28800,
   'lockdirectory': None,
   'maxsize': 10000,
   'memory': 2000,
   'recursive': False}
  >>> nxsetconfig(memory=4000)
  >>> nxgetconfig('memory')
  4000

Here is a list of the current configuration parameters and their
defaults.

* ``compression``:
    This sets the default HDF5 compression filter. The default is
    'gzip'.

* ``encoding``:
    This sets the default encoding for input strings. The default is
    'utf-8'.

* ``lock``:
    This sets the number of seconds before an attempted file lock
    acquisition times out. The default is 10 seconds. If set to 0, file
    locking is disabled (but see below).

* ``lockexpiry``:
    This sets the number of seconds before a file lock is considered
    stale. If the lock file is older than this value, a new lock can be
    acquired. The default is 28,800 seconds (8 hours).

* ``lockdirectory``:
    This defines the path to a directory, in which to store the lock
    files. The directory should be set to allow users to create files.
    The default is None, in which case, file locks are stored in the
    same directory as the NeXus file to be locked.

    .. note:: If ``lockdirectory`` is defined, the ``lock`` parameter
              is automatically set to 10 seconds if the currently set
              value is 0, *i.e.,* defining a lock directory is enough
              to enable file locking.

* ``maxsize``:
    This sets the maximum size of an array before HDF5 chunking and
    compression is turned on by default. The default is 10,000.

* ``memory``:
    This sets the memory limit (in MB) for loading arrays into memory.
    If a field contains data that is larger than this limit, it can only
    be accessed as a series of smaller slabs using the standard slicing
    syntax. The default is 2000 MB.

* ``recursive``:
    This sets the default method of loading NeXus files. If the value is
    set to `True`, all objects in the file are loaded (lazily) into
    memory. If set to `False`, only the first two levels of hierarchy
    are initially loaded. Lower levels are loaded when they are
    referenced. This includes tests for the existence of object paths in
    the file. The default is `False`.

Environment variables
---------------------
The configuration parameters can also be set by defining environment
variables, defined either in a user's login files or by a system
administrator. This is particularly useful for setting a system-wide
lock-file directory for all users accessing the same data.

When the *nexusformat* package is loaded, environment variables take
precedence over the package defaults. The user can still override them
manually by calling ``nxsetconfig``.

All of the configuration parameters defined in the previous section can
be defined. The equivalent environment variable name is constructed by
prefixing the parameter name in upper case by 'NX\_', *e.g.*,
'NX_COMPRESSION', 'NX_ENCODING', *etc*.
